README.md, before:

# opencode-codex-provider

`opencode-codex-provider` is an external plugin that lets the open-source **opencode** CLI run against the Codex MCP server that ships with OpenAI’s ChatGPT desktop apps. The plugin is intentionally small: it keeps the Codex-specific streaming logic out of the upstream opencode tree while still delivering a first-class streaming experience and minimal setup cost for users with a ChatGPT Pro subscription.

---

## What problem does it solve?

Opencode’s core distribution targets API-model providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). ChatGPT Pro customers, however, already have access to the Codex MCP server through the ChatGPT desktop app and its `codex` CLI binary. Using that local server is attractive because:

- **Zero extra API fees:** traffic stays inside the ChatGPT plan you already pay for.
- **Lower latency & richer events:** the MCP server emits fine-grained notifications (agent messages, reasoning deltas, command output) that the stock opencode provider never surfaced.
- **Tooling parity:** you get the same sand-boxing, approvals, and CLI automation that opencode already exposes for other LLMs.

This repo delivers exactly that by:

1. Shipping a drop-in `createCodexProvider()` implementation that wraps the MCP server and streams every event.
2. Providing a one-line plugin hook so opencode can dynamically import that provider instead of the stock “SDK loader.”
3. Supplying a tiny patch (`codex-provider-core.patch`) that teaches opencode’s provider subsystem how to defer to custom factories when requested.

---

## How it works (high level)

1. **Plugin registration (`index.ts`)**  
   When opencode boots, it enumerates plugins listed in `opencode.json`. This plugin’s `CodexProviderPlugin` keeps the existing provider metadata (names, models, options) but also sets `providerFactory: "opencode-codex-provider/provider"`. That single option is the “escape hatch” our patch looks for.

2. **Core patch (`codex-provider-core.patch`)**  
   The patch alters `packages/opencode/src/provider/provider.ts#getModel`. Before invoking the normal SDK loader, it checks whether `provider.options.providerFactory` exists. If it does, opencode dynamically imports the module and expects it to expose `createCodexProvider`. That returned factory receives all subsequent language-model calls. No other providers are touched, and the fallback path remains unchanged.

3. **Custom provider (`src/codexProvider.ts`)**  
   This is a TypeScript port of the Codex streaming logic. Notable responsibilities:
   - Spawns the `codex` CLI MCP server and speaks JSON-RPC.
   - Streams `agent_message_delta`, `agent_reasoning_delta`, `exec_command_output_delta`, and `task_complete` events in real time.
   - Provides command-output filtering, reasoning dedupe, and error handling consistent with the upstream CLI.
   - Keeps the implementation self-contained so updating opencode doesn’t require touching these files.

4. **Setup script (`setup-codex-provider.sh`)**  
   Because the upstream repo has no first-class hook yet, we ship a script that:
   - Applies the one-hunk patch to the checked-out `opencode` repository.
   - Adds `"file:<workspace>/opencode-codex-provider"` as a local Bun dependency of `packages/opencode`.
   - Ensures the workspace `opencode.json` contains `"opencode-codex-provider"` in the `plugin` array.
   The script is idempotent—it skips the patch if already applied and quietly relinks the package.

---

## Repository layout

```
opencode-codex-provider/
├── codex-provider-core.patch      # single-hunk core hook that adds providerFactory support
├── index.ts                       # plugin entry that registers models & providerFactory
├── package.json                   # Bun/TypeScript metadata (exports both plugin + provider)
├── setup-codex-provider.sh        # helper script to patch/link the main opencode repo
└── src/
    ├── codexClient.ts             # JSON-RPC MCP client + notification plumbing
    ├── codexProvider.ts           # LanguageModel implementation with streaming glue
    ├── logger.ts                  # lightweight debug logger (no opencode imports required)
    ├── types.ts                   # shared JSON-RPC and provider option types
    └── utils.ts                   # message extraction & option mappers
```

Expected workspace layout:

```
<workspace>/opencode                    # upstream opencode repo
<workspace>/opencode-codex-provider     # this plugin repo
```

---

## Quick start

1. **Install opencode deps (if necessary)**

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode
   bun install
   ```

2. **Apply patch & link provider**

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode-codex-provider
   ./setup-codex-provider.sh
   ```

   The script will:
   - Patch `packages/opencode/src/provider/provider.ts` so it recognizes `providerFactory`.
   - Add this repo as a local dependency (`file:<workspace>/opencode-codex-provider`).
   - Append `"opencode-codex-provider"` to `<workspace>/opencode.json`’s `plugin` list.

3. **Verify streaming works**

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode/opencode
   bun run dev --print-logs --log-level DEBUG run "hello"
   ```

   Look for:
   - Log entries like `providerID=codex source=custom-factory`.
   - `[opencode-codex-provider]` debug lines showing MCP notifications.
   - Live `agent_message_delta` and reasoning deltas in the CLI output.

   ![Codex streaming in opencode](./screenshot1.png)

---

## Updating / reapplying

Whenever you pull a new version of `opencode` or reset the repo:

```bash
cd <workspace>/opencode-codex-provider
./setup-codex-provider.sh
```

The script is safe to rerun; it only re-applies the patch if necessary and relinks the local package.

---

## Removing the integration

1. In `opencode`, revert the patched file:

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode/opencode
   git checkout -- packages/opencode/src/provider/provider.ts
   ```

2. Optionally remove the local dependency and delete `"opencode-codex-provider"` from `<workspace>/opencode.json`.

No other files are touched.

---

## Limitations & considerations

- This is intentionally a short-term “bridge” until opencode grows a first-class provider extension mechanism. Expect to re-run the setup script after upgrading opencode.
- The Codex MCP server comes from the ChatGPT desktop app: make sure the `codex` CLI is installed and on your path.
- The plugin defaults to streaming reasoning and command output. Tweak `streamReasoning`, `streamCommandOutput`, or `includeMessageSource` in opencode’s provider options if you need different behaviour.
- Treat the patch as a lightweight override, not a permanent fork. Keep an eye on upstream changes to `provider.ts` so re-applying stays trivial.

---

## License


Unless otherwise noted, this repository follows the same license terms as the upstream opencode project.

Commit message:

Revise README for opencode-codex-provider plugin
Updated the README to clarify the purpose of the opencode-codex-provider plugin and its benefits for ChatGPT Pro users.

README.md, after:

# opencode-codex-provider

`opencode-codex-provider` is an external 'plugin' (AKA hack) that lets the **opencode** CLI use OpenAI GTP 5 Codex model by abusing the Codex CLI's MCP server feature. 

---

## What problem does it solve?

Opencode’s core distribution targets API-model providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). 
ChatGPT Pro customers have access to the Codex CLI but can't use their subs with the regular OpenAI API.
Rather than integrate the OAuth flows and implement the Responses API I decided to take another approach, here we load codex cli as an MCP server, but we do so as a provider for opencode so when you type a prompt it gets sent directly to the codex.

- **Zero extra API fees:** traffic stays inside the ChatGPT plan you already pay for.
- **Lower latency & richer events:** the MCP server emits fine-grained notifications (agent messages, reasoning deltas, command output) that the stock opencode provider never surfaced.
- **Tooling parity:** you get the same sand-boxing, approvals, and CLI automation that opencode already exposes for other LLMs.

This repo delivers exactly that by:

1. Shipping a drop-in `createCodexProvider()` implementation that wraps the MCP server and streams every event.
2. Providing a one-line plugin hook so opencode can dynamically import that provider instead of the stock “SDK loader.”
3. Supplying a tiny patch (`codex-provider-core.patch`) that teaches opencode’s provider subsystem how to defer to custom factories when requested.

---

## How it works (high level)

1. **Plugin registration (`index.ts`)**  
   When opencode boots, it enumerates plugins listed in `opencode.json`. This plugin’s `CodexProviderPlugin` keeps the existing provider metadata (names, models, options) but also sets `providerFactory: "opencode-codex-provider/provider"`. That single option is the “escape hatch” our patch looks for.

2. **Core patch (`codex-provider-core.patch`)**  
   The patch alters `packages/opencode/src/provider/provider.ts#getModel`. Before invoking the normal SDK loader, it checks whether `provider.options.providerFactory` exists. If it does, opencode dynamically imports the module and expects it to expose `createCodexProvider`. That returned factory receives all subsequent language-model calls. No other providers are touched, and the fallback path remains unchanged.

3. **Custom provider (`src/codexProvider.ts`)**  
   This is a TypeScript port of the Codex streaming logic. Notable responsibilities:
   - Spawns the `codex` CLI MCP server and speaks JSON-RPC.
   - Streams `agent_message_delta`, `agent_reasoning_delta`, `exec_command_output_delta`, and `task_complete` events in real time.
   - Provides command-output filtering, reasoning dedupe, and error handling consistent with the upstream CLI.
   - Keeps the implementation self-contained so updating opencode doesn’t require touching these files.

4. **Setup script (`setup-codex-provider.sh`)**  
   Because the upstream repo has no first-class hook yet, we ship a script that:
   - Applies the one-hunk patch to the checked-out `opencode` repository.
   - Adds `"file:<workspace>/opencode-codex-provider"` as a local Bun dependency of `packages/opencode`.
   - Ensures the workspace `opencode.json` contains `"opencode-codex-provider"` in the `plugin` array.
   The script is idempotent—it skips the patch if already applied and quietly relinks the package.

---

## Repository layout

```
opencode-codex-provider/
├── codex-provider-core.patch      # single-hunk core hook that adds providerFactory support
├── index.ts                       # plugin entry that registers models & providerFactory
├── package.json                   # Bun/TypeScript metadata (exports both plugin + provider)
├── setup-codex-provider.sh        # helper script to patch/link the main opencode repo
└── src/
    ├── codexClient.ts             # JSON-RPC MCP client + notification plumbing
    ├── codexProvider.ts           # LanguageModel implementation with streaming glue
    ├── logger.ts                  # lightweight debug logger (no opencode imports required)
    ├── types.ts                   # shared JSON-RPC and provider option types
    └── utils.ts                   # message extraction & option mappers
```

Expected workspace layout:

```
<workspace>/opencode                    # upstream opencode repo
<workspace>/opencode-codex-provider     # this plugin repo
```

---

## Quick start

1. **Install opencode deps (if necessary)**

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode
   bun install
   ```

2. **Apply patch & link provider**

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode-codex-provider
   ./setup-codex-provider.sh
   ```

   The script will:
   - Patch `packages/opencode/src/provider/provider.ts` so it recognizes `providerFactory`.
   - Add this repo as a local dependency (`file:<workspace>/opencode-codex-provider`).
   - Append `"opencode-codex-provider"` to `<workspace>/opencode.json`’s `plugin` list.

3. **Verify streaming works**

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode/opencode
   bun run dev --print-logs --log-level DEBUG run "hello"
   ```

   Look for:
   - Log entries like `providerID=codex source=custom-factory`.
   - `[opencode-codex-provider]` debug lines showing MCP notifications.
   - Live `agent_message_delta` and reasoning deltas in the CLI output.

   ![Codex streaming in opencode](./screenshot1.png)

---

## Updating / reapplying

Whenever you pull a new version of `opencode` or reset the repo:

```bash
cd <workspace>/opencode-codex-provider
./setup-codex-provider.sh
```

The script is safe to rerun; it only re-applies the patch if necessary and relinks the local package.

---

## Removing the integration

1. In `opencode`, revert the patched file:

   ```bash
   cd <workspace>/opencode/opencode
   git checkout -- packages/opencode/src/provider/provider.ts
   ```

2. Optionally remove the local dependency and delete `"opencode-codex-provider"` from `<workspace>/opencode.json`.

No other files are touched.

---

## Limitations & considerations

- This is intentionally a short-term “bridge” until opencode grows a first-class provider extension mechanism. Expect to re-run the setup script after upgrading opencode.
- The Codex MCP server comes from the ChatGPT desktop app: make sure the `codex` CLI is installed and on your path.
- The plugin defaults to streaming reasoning and command output. Tweak `streamReasoning`, `streamCommandOutput`, or `includeMessageSource` in opencode’s provider options if you need different behaviour.
- Treat the patch as a lightweight override, not a permanent fork. Keep an eye on upstream changes to `provider.ts` so re-applying stays trivial.

---

## License


Unless otherwise noted, this repository follows the same license terms as the upstream opencode project.
